CHAPTER XXVIII JANE AYRE
Two days have passed. It is a summer evening. The coachman has set me down at a place called White Cross. He could take me no farther for the sum I had given, and I was not possessed of another shilling in the world. The coach is a mile off by this time. I am alone.
At this moment I discover that I forgot to take my parcel out of the pocket of the coach, where I had placed it for safety. There it remains. There it must remain. And now I am absolutely destitute.
White Cross is no town, nor even a hamlet. It is but a stone pillar set up where four roads meet, whitewashed, I suppose, to be more obvious at a distance and in darkness. Four arms spring from its summit, the nearest town to which these point is, according to the inscription, distant ten miles, the farthest above twenty.
From the well-known names of these towns I learn in what county I have lighted. A North Midland Shire, dusk with moorland, rigid with mountain. This I see. There are great moors behind and on each hand of me. There are waves of mountains far beyond that deep valley at my feet.
The population here must be thin, and I see no passengers on these roads. They stretch out east, west, north and south-wide. Broad and lonely, they are all cut in the moor, and the heather grows deep and wild to their very verge.
Yet a chance traveller might pass by, and I wish no eye to see me now. Strangers would wonder what I am doing, lingering here at the signpost, evidently objectless and lost. I might be questioned, I could give no answer, but what would sound incredible and excite suspicion?
Not a tie holds me to human society at this moment. Not a charm or hope calls me where my fellow creatures are. None that saw me would have a kind thought or a good wish for me. I have no relative but the Universal Mother. Noture, I will seek her breast and ask repose.
I struck straight into the heath. I held onto a hollow I saw deeply, furrowing the brown moor side. I waded knee-deep in its dark growth. I turned with its turnings, and finding a moss-blackened granite crag in a hidden angle, I sat down under it. High banks of moor were about me. The crag protected my head. The sky was over that.
Some time passed before I felt tranquil even here. I had a vague dread that wild cattle might be near, or that some sportsman or poacher might discover me. If a gust of wind swept the waste, I looked up, fearing it was the rush of a bull.
If a plover whistled, I imagined it a man, finding my apprehensions unfounded, however, and calmed by the deep silence that rained as evening declined at nightfall.
I took confidence, as yet I had not thought. I had only listened, watched, dreaded. Now I regained the faculty of reflection. What was I to do? Where to go? Oh, intolerable questions, when I could do nothing and go nowhere, when a long way must yet be measured by my weary, trembling limbs before I could reach human habitation.
I had to be entreated before I could get a lodging, reluctant sympathy importuned. Almost certain repulse incurred before my tale could be listened to, or one of my wants relieved.
I touched the heath, it was dry, and yet warm with the beat of the summer day. I looked at the sky, it was pure, a kindly star twinkled just above the Chasm Ridge.
The dew fell, but with perpetuous softness. No breeze whispered. Nature seemed to me benign and good. I thought she loved me, outcast as I was, and I, who from man could anticipate only mistrust, rejection, insult, clung to her with filial fondness.
Tonight, at least, I would be her guest. As I was her child, my mother would lodge me without money and without price.
I had one morsel of bread yet, the remnant of a roll I had bought in a town we passed through at noon with a stray penny, my last coin.
I saw ripe bilberries gleaming here and there, like jet-beads in the heath. I gathered a handful and ate them with the bread.
My hunger, sharp before, was, if not satisfied, appeased by this hermit's meal.
I said my evening prayers at its conclusion, and then chose my couch.
Beside the crag, the heath was very deep. When I lay down, my feet were buried in it. Rising high on each side, it left only a narrow space for the night air to invade.
I folded my shawl double and spread it over me for a couplet. A low, mossy swell was my pillow.
Thus lodged, I was not, at least, at the commencement of the night cold.
My rest might have been blissful enough, only a sad heart broke it.
It plained of its gaping wounds, its inward bleeding, its writhing cords.
It trembled for Mr. Rochester and his doom. It bemoaned him with a bitter pity.
It demanded him with ceaseless longing, an impudent as a bird with both wings broken.
It still quivered at shattered pinions in vain attempts to seek him.
Worn out with this torture of thought, I rose to my knees.
Night was come, and her planets were risen, a safe, still night, too serene for the companionship of fear.
We know that God is everywhere, but certainly we feel his presence most when his works are on the grander scale spread before us.
And it is in the unclouded night sky, where his worlds wield their silent course, that we read clearest his infatude.
His omnipotence, his omnipresence, I had risen to my knees to pray for Mr. Rochester.
Looking up, I, with tear-dimmed eyes, saw the mighty Milky Way, remembering what it was, what countless systems there swept space like a soft trace of light.
I felt the might and strength of God.
Sure was I of his efficiency to save what he had made, convinced I grew that neither earth should perish, nor one of the souls it treasured.
I turned my prayer to thanksgiving, the source of life was also the saviour of spirits.
Mr. Rochester was safe, he was God's, and my God would he be guarded.
I again nestled to the breast of the hill, and erlong in sleep forgot sorrow.
But next day, want came to me pale and bare, long after the little birds had left their nests.
Long after bees had come in the sweet prime of day to gather the heath honey before the dew was dried.
When the long morning shadows were curtailed, and the sun filled earth and sky, I got up and I looked round me.
What a still, hot, perfect day, what a golden desert to spreading more.
Everywhere sunshine, I wished I could live in it and on it.
I saw a lizard run over the crag, I saw a bee busy among the sweet bilberries.
I would fain at the moment had become bee or lizard, and I might have found fitting nutriment, permanent shelter here.
But I was a human being, and had a human being's wants.
I must not linger where there was nothing to supply them.
I rose, I looked back at the bed I had left, hopeless of the future.
I wished but this, that my Maker had that night thought good to require my soul of me while I slept,
and that this weary frame, absolved by death from further conflict with fate,
had now but to decay quietly, and mingle in peace with the soil of this wilderness.
Life, however, was yet in my possession, with all its requirements, and pains, and responsibilities.
The burden must be carried, the want provided for, the suffering endured, the responsibility fulfilled, I set out.
White cross regained, I followed a road which led from the sun, now fervent and high.
By no other circumstance had I willed to decide my choice.
I walked a long time, and when I thought I had nearly done enough,
and might consciously yield to the fatigue that almost overpowered me,
might relax this forced action, and, sitting down on a stone I saw near,
submit resistlessly to the apathy that clogged heart and limb.
I heard a bell chime, a church bell.
I turned in the direction of the sound, and there, amongst the romantic hills,
whose changes and aspect I had ceased to note an hour ago, I saw a hamlet and a spire.
All the valley at my right hand was full of pasture fields, and cornfields, and wood,
and a glittering stream ran zigzag through the varied shades of green,
the mellowing grain, the sombre woodland, the clear and sunny leaf.
Recalled by the rumbling of wheels to the road before me,
I saw a heavily laden wagon laboring up the hill,
and not far beyond were two cows and their drover.
Human life and human labour were near.
I must struggle on, strive to live, and bend to toil like the rest.
About two o'clock p.m. I entered the village.
At the bottom of its one street there was a little shop with some cakes of bread in the window.
I covered it a cake of bread.
With that refreshment I could perhaps regain a degree of energy.
Without it, it would be difficult to proceed.
The wish to have some strength and some vigour returned to me as soon as I was amongst my fellow beings.
I felt it would be degrading to faint with hunger on the causeway of a hamlet.
Had I nothing about me I could offer in exchange for one of these rolls.
I considered I had a small silk handkerchief tied round my throat.
I had my gloves.
I could hardly tell how men and women in extremities of destitution proceeded.
I did not know whether either of these articles would be accepted.
Probably they would not, but I must try.
I entered the shop.
A woman was there, seeing a respectably dressed person, a lady as she supposed.
She came forward with civility.
How could she serve me?
I was seized with shame.
My tongue would not utter the request I had prepared.
I did not offer her the half-worn gloves, the creased handkerchief.
Besides, I felt it would be absurd.
I only begged permission to sit down a moment, as I was tired.
Disappointed in the expectation of a customer, she coolly acceded to my request.
She pointed to a seat.
I sunk into it.
I felt sorely urged to weep, but conscience how unreasonably such a manifestation would be.
I restrained it.
Soon I asked her if there were any dressmaker or plain workwoman in the village.
Yes, two or three, quite as many as there was employment for.
I reflected.
I was driven to the point now.
I was brought face to face with necessity.
I stood in the position of one without a resource, without a friend, without a coin.
I must do something.
What?
I must apply somewhere.
Where?
Did she know of any place in the neighbourhood where a servant was wanted?
Nah, she couldn't say.
What was the cheap trade in this place?
What did most of the people do?
Some were farm labourers.
A good deal worked at Mr Oliver's needle factory and at the foundry.
Did Mr Oliver employ women?
Nah, it was men's work.
And what did the women do?
I know it was the answer.
Some does one thing and some another.
Poor folk mungered on as they can.
She seemed to be tired of my questions and, indeed, what claim had I to importune her?
A neighbour or two came in.
My chair was evidently wanted.
I took leave.
I passed up the street, looking as I went at all the houses to the right hand and to
But I could discover no pretext, nor see an inducement to enter any.
I rambled round the hamlet, going sometimes to a little distance and returning again,
for an hour or more.
Much exhausted and suffering greatly now for want of food, I turned aside into a lane and
sat down under the hedge.
Er, many minutes had elapsed.
I was again on my feet, however, and again searching something, a resource, or at least
an informant.
A pretty little house stood at the top of the lane, with a garden before it, exquisitely
neat and brilliantly blooming.
I stopped at it.
What business had I to approach the white door or touch the glittering knocker?
In what way could it possibly be the interest of the inhabitants of that dwelling to serve
me?
Yet I drew near and knocked.
A mould-looking, cleanly attired young woman opened the door.
In such a voice as might be expected from a hopeless heart and fainting frame, a voice
wretchedly low and faltering, I asked if a servant was wanted here.
No, said she, we do not keep a servant.
Can you tell me where I could get employment of any kind?
I continued.
I am a stranger without acquaintance in this place.
I want some work, no matter what.
But it was not her business to think for me or to seek a place for me, besides, in her
eyes, how doubtful must have appeared my character.
Position.
Tale.
She shook her head.
She was sorry she could give me no information.
And the white door closed, quite gently and civilly, but it shut me out.
If she had held it open a little longer, I believe I should have begged a piece of bread,
for I was now brought low.
I could not bear to return to the sordid village, where, besides, no prospect of aid was visible.
I should have longed rather to deviate to a wood, I saw not far off, which appeared
in its thick shade to offer inviting shelter.
But I was so sick, so weak, so gnawed with nature's cravings, instinct kept me roaming
round abodes, where there was a chance of food.
Solitude would be no solitude.
Rest, no rest, while the vulture, hunger, thus sunk beak and talons in my side.
I drew new houses, I left them and came back again, and again I wandered away, always repelled
by the consciousness of having no claim to ask.
No right to expect interest in my isolated lot.
Meantime the afternoon advanced, while I thus wandered about like a lost and starving dog.
In crossing a field I saw the church spire before me.
I hastened towards it.
Near the churchyard and in the middle of a garden stood a well-built, though small house,
which I had no doubt was the parsonage.
I remembered that strangers who arrive at a place where they have no friends and who
want employment sometimes apply to the clergyman for introduction and aid.
It is the clergyman's function to help, at least with advice, those who wish to help
themselves.
I seemed to have something like a right to seek counsel here, renewing then my courage
and gathering my feeble remains of strength I pushed on.
I reached the house and knocked at the kitchen door.
An old woman opened.
I asked, was this the parsonage?
Yes.
Was the clergyman in?
No.
Would he be in soon?
No, he was gone from home.
To a distance?
Not so far.
He had been called away by the sudden death of his father.
He was at Marsh End now, and would very likely stay there a fortnight longer.
Was there any lady of the house?
No, there was naught but here, and she was housekeeper, and of her reader I could not
bear to ask the relief for want of which I was thinking.
I could not yet beg, and again I crawled away.
Once more I took off my handkerchief.
Once more I thought of the cakes of bread in the little shop.
Oh, for butter crust, for but one mouthful to allay the pang of famine.
Instinctively I turned my face again to the village.
I found the shop again, and I went in.
And though others were there besides the woman, I ventured the request.
Would she give me a roll for this handkerchief?
She looked at me with evident suspicion.
No, she never sold stuff either way.
Almost desperate I asked for half a cake.
She again refused.
How could she tell where I had got the handkerchief?
She said.
Would she take my gloves?
No.
What could she do with them?
Reader, it is not pleasant to dwell on these details.
Some say there is enjoyment in looking back to painful experience past.
But at this day I can scarcely bear to review the times to which I allude.
The moral degradation blent with the physical suffering,
form too distressing a recollection ever to be willingly dwelt on.
I blame none of these who repulse me.
I felt it was what was to be expected, and what could not be helped,
an ordinary beggar is frequently an object of suspicion,
a well-dressed beggar, inevitably so.
To be sure, what I begged was employment,
but whose business was it to provide me with employment?
Not certainly that of persons who saw me then for the first time,
and who knew nothing about my character,
and as to the woman who would not take my handkerchief
in exchange for her bread.
Why, she was right, if the offer appeared to her sinister
or the exchange unprofitable.
Let me condense now.
I am sick of the subject.
A little before dark I passed the farmhouse,
at the open door of which the farmer was sitting,
eating his supper of bread and cheese.
I stopped and said,
Will you give me a piece of bread, for I am very hungry.
He cast on me a glance of surprise,
but without answering he cut a thick slice from his loaf
and gave it to me.
I imagined he did not think I was a beggar,
but only an eccentric sort of lady,
who had taken a fancy to his brown loaf.
As soon as I was out of sight of his house,
I sat down and ate it.
I could not hope to get a lodging under a roof
and sort it in the wood I had been before alluded to.
But by night was wretched, my rest broken,
the ground was damp, the air cold.
Besides, intruders passed near me more than once,
and I had again and again to change my quarters.
No sense of safety or tranquillity befriended me.
Towards morning it rained,
the whole of the following day was wet.
Do not ask me, reader,
to give a minute account of that day.
As before I sought work,
as before I was repulsed,
as before I starved,
but once did food pass my lips.
At the door of a cottage
I saw a little girl about to throw a mess of cold porridge
into a pig trough.
Will you give me that? I asked.
She stared at me.
Mother, she exclaimed,
there is a woman wants me to give her these porridge.
Well, alas, replied a voice within,
give it her if she's a beggar.
The pig doesn't want it.
The girl emptied the stiffened mould into my hand
and I devoured it ravenously.
As the wet twilight deepened
I stopped in a solitary bridle path
which I had been pursuing an hour or more.
My strength is quite failing me,
I said in a solid look way.
I feel I cannot go much farther.
Shall I be an outcast again this night?
While the rain descends so,
must I lay my head on the cold drenched ground?
I fear I cannot do otherwise,
for who will receive me?
But it will be very dreadful
with this feeling of hunger,
faintness, chill
and this sense of desolation,
this total prostration of hope,
in all likelihood though I should die before morning.
And why cannot I reconcile myself to the prospect of death?
Why do I struggle to retain a valueless life?
Because I know or believe Mr Rochester is living
and then to die of want and cold is a fate
to which nature cannot submit passively.
O Providence, sustain me a little longer.
Aid, direct me.
My glazed eye wandered over the dim and misty landscape.
I saw I had strayed far from the village.
It was quite out of sight.
The very cultivation surrounding it had disappeared.
I had by crossways and by paths
once more drawn near the tract of Moorland
and now only a few fields,
almost as wild and unproductive as the heath
from which they were scarcely reclaimed,
lay between me and the dusky hill.
Well, I would rather die yonder than in a street
or on a frequented road.
I reflected.
And far better that crows and ravens,
if any ravens there be in these regions,
should pick my flesh from my bones
than that they should be prisoned in a workhouse coffin
and moulded in a pauper's grave.
To the hill then I turned.
I reached it.
It remained now only to find a hollow where I could lie down
and feel at least hidden, if not secure.
But all the surface of the waste looked level.
It showed no variation but a tint green,
where rush and moss overgrew the marshes,
black where the dry soil bore only heath,
dark as it was getting.
I could still see these changes,
though but as mere alternations of light and shade,
for colour had faded with the daylight.
My eyes still roved over the sullen swell
and along the moor edge.
Vanishing amidst the wildest scenery,
when on one dim point,
far in among the marshes and the ridges,
a light sprung up.
That is, an igneous aphatus,
was my first thought,
and I expected it would soon vanish.
It burnt on, however, quite steadily,
neither receding nor advancing.
Is it, then, a bonfire just kindled?
I questioned.
I watched to see whether it would spread,
but no, as it did not diminish,
so it did not enlarge.
It may be a candle in a house.
I then conjectured,
but if so, I can never reach it.
It is much too far away,
and were it within a yard of me,
what would it avail?
I should but knock at the door
to have it shut in my face.
And I sunk down where I stood
and hid my face against the ground.
I lay still awhile.
The night wind swept over the hill and over me
and died moaning in the distance.
The rain fell fast,
wetting me afresh to the skin.
Could I but had stiffened to the still frost,
the friendly numbness of death?
It might have pelted on.
I should not have felt it,
but my yet living flesh
shuddered at its chilling influence.
I rose ere long.
The light was yet there,
shining dim but constant through the rain.
I tried to walk again.
I dragged my exhausted limbs slowly towards it.
It led me a slant over the hill,
through a wide bog,
which would have been impassable in winter,
and was splashy and shaking even now,
in the height of summer.
Here I fell twice,
but as often as I rose and rallied my faculties,
this light was my forlorn hope.
I must gain it.
Having crossed the marsh,
I saw a trace of white over the moor.
I approached it.
It was a road or a track.
It led straight up to the light,
which now beamed from a sort of knoll,
amidst a clump of trees,
furs apparently,
from what I could distinguish
at the character of their forms
and foliage through the gloom.
My star vanished as I drew near.
Some obstacle had intervened
between me and it.
I put out my hand
to feel the dark mass before me.
I discriminated the rough stones
of a low wall.
Above it, something like palisades,
and within a high and prickly hedge.
I groped on.
Again a whitish object
gleamed before me.
It was a gate, a wicket.
It moved on its hinges
as I touched it.
On each side stood a sable bush holly,
or yew.
Entering the gate and passing the shrubs,
the silhouette of a house
rose to view, black, low,
and rather long.
But the guiding light shone nowhere.
Always obscurity.
Were the inmates retired to rest?
I fear it must be so.
In seeking the door,
I turned an angle.
There shot out the friendly gleam again,
from the lozenge panes
of a very small lattice window,
within a foot off the ground,
made still smaller
by the grove of ivy
or some other creeping plant,
whose leaves clustered thick
over the portion of the house wall
in which it was set.
The aperture was so screened and narrow
that curtain or shutter
had been deemed unnecessary.
And when I stooped down
and put aside the spray of foliage
shooting over it,
I could see all within.
I could see clearly a room
with a sanded floor,
clean scoured,
a dresser of walnut,
with pewter plates ranged in rows,
reflecting the redness and radiance
of a glowing peat fire.
I could see a clock,
a white deal table,
some chairs.
The candle, whose ray had been my beacon,
burnt on the table,
and by its light
an elderly woman,
somewhat rough looking,
but scrupulously clean,
like all about her,
was knitting a stocking.
I noticed these objects
coarsely only.
In them there was nothing extraordinary.
A group of more
interest appeared near the half.
Sitting still
amidst the rosy piece
and warmth suffusing it,
two young, graceful women,
ladies in every point,
sat, one in a low rocking chair,
the other on a lower stool,
both wore deep mourning
of crepe and bombazing.
Which sombre garb
singularly set off very fair necks
and faces.
A large old pointer dog
rested its massive head
on the knee of one girl.
In the lap of the other was cushioned
a black cat.
A strange place was this humble
kitchen for such occupants.
Who were they?
They could not be the daughters
of the elderly person at the table,
for she looked like a rustic,
and they were all delicacy
and cultivation.
I had nowhere seen such faces
as theirs.
And yet, as I gazed on them,
I seemed intimate with
every liniment.
I cannot call them handsome.
They were too pale and grey
for the word, as they each
bent over a book.
They looked thoughtful, almost
to severity.
A stand between them supported
a second candle and two great
volumes, to which they
frequently referred,
comparing them, seemingly
with the smaller books they held
in their hands.
Like people consulting a dictionary
to aid them in the task of
translation.
This scene was as silent as if
all the figures had been shadows
and the firelit apartment a picture.
So hushed was it.
I could hear the cinders
fall from the grate, the clock tick
in its obscure corner,
and I even fancied
I could distinguish the click-click
of the woman's knitting needles.
When, therefore,
a voice broke the strange
stillness at last,
it was audible enough to me.
Listen, Diana,
said one of the absorbed students.
France and old Daniel
are together in the night-time,
and France is telling a dream
from which he has awakened in terror.
Listen.
And in a low voice she read
something of which not one word
was intelligible to me.
For it was in an
unknown tongue, neither
French nor Latin.
Whether it was Greek or German,
I could not tell.
That is strong, she said,
when she had finished. I relish it.
The other girl, who
had lifted her head to listen to her
sister, repeated, while
she gazed at the fire,
a line of what had been read.
At a later day
I knew the language and the book.
Therefore, I will herequote
the line, though
when I first heard it, it was
only like a stroke on sounding
brass to me, conveying
no meaning.
The foot came forward
to tell how the star knocked.
Good, good,
she exclaimed,
while her dark and deep eyes
sparkled. There you have
a dim and mighty archangel
fitly set before you.
The line is worth a hundred
pages of Faustian.
I like it.
Both were again silent.
Is there only country where they
talk, eye that way,
us the old woman, looking up
from her knitting? Yes, Hannah,
a far larger country
than England, where they
talk in no other way.
Well, for sure case,
I know how they can understand
to one another.
And if either of you went there,
you could tell what they said, I guess.
We probably tell
something of what they said,
but not all, for we are not
as clever as you think us, Hannah.
We don't speak German,
and we cannot read it without a dictionary
to help us.
And what good does it do you?
We mean to teach it
sometime, or at least
their elements, as they say,
and then we shall get more money
than we do now.
Very like, but give over
studying, you've done enough for tonight.
I think we have,
at least I'm tired.
Mary, are you?
Mortally, after all, it's
tough work fagging away at a language
with no master
but a lexicon.
It is, especially such a language
as this crabbed but glorious
douche. I wonder
when St John will come home.
Surely he will not be
long now. It is just
ten. Looking at a little
gold watch, she drew from her
girdle. It rains
fast, Hannah. Will you have
the goodness to look at the fire
in the parlour?
The woman rose. She opened a door
through which I dimly saw
a passage. Soon
I heard her stir a fire
in an inner room.
She presently came back.
Ah, children, she
said. It fair troubles
me to go into yon room now.
It looks so lonesome
with the chair empty and set
back in a corner. She wiped
her eyes with her apron. The
two girls, grave before,
look sad now.
But he is in a better place,
continued Hannah. We shouldn't
wish him here again, and
then nobody need to have a quieter
death, nor he had.
You say he never mentioned
us, inquired one of the ladies.
He hadn't time,
Ben. He was gone in a minute.
Was your father?
He had been a bit ailing like
the day before, but not
to signify, and when Mr.
St. John asked if he would like
either of you to be sent for,
he fair laughed at him.
He began again
with a bit of heaviness in his head
the next day. That
is a fortnight sin,
and he went to sleep and never
wakened. He wore a moustache
when your brother went into
the chamber and fanned him.
Ah, children, that's
the last of the old stock.
For ye and Mr. St. John
is like of different sort.
To them is gone.
For all your mother wore Mitch
your way, and a most
a book learned. She willed
a picture, oh yea, Mary.
Diana is like
your father. I thought
them so similar I could not
tell where the old servant,
for such I now concluded her
to be, saw the difference.
Both were fair
complexioned and slenderly made,
both possessed
faces full of distinction
and intelligence.
One, to be sure, had hair
a shade darker than the other,
and there was a difference in their
style of wearing it. Mary's
pale brown locks were parted
and braided smooth.
Diana's duskier tresses
covered her neck with thick
curls. The clock struck
ten. You want your supper,
I am sure, observed Hannah,
and so will Mr. St. John
when he comes in.
And she proceeded to prepare
the meal. The ladies rose.
They seemed about to withdraw
to the parlour.
Till this moment I had been
so intent on watching them.
Their appearance and conversation
had excited in me so
keen an interest. I had
half forgotten my own
wretched position. Now it
occurred to me.
More desolate, more desperate
than ever, it seemed from
contrast. And how impossible
did it appear to touch the
inmates of this house with
concern on my behalf
to make them believe in the truth
of my wants and woes,
to induce them to vouch
safe a rest for my wanderings.
As I groped out the
door and knocked at it
hesitantly, I felt
that last idea to be a
mere chimera. Hannah
opened. What do you
want? She inquired,
in a voice of surprise, as she
surveyed me by the light of the
candle she held.
May I speak to your mistresses?
I said. You had
better tell me what you have to
say to them. Where do you come
from? I am a stranger.
What is your business
here at this hour?
I want a night's shelter
in an outhouse or anywhere
and a morsel of bread to
eat. Distrust,
the very feeling I dreaded,
appeared in Hannah's face.
I'll give you a piece of bread,
she said after a pause.
But we can't take in a
vagrant to lodge. It isn't
likely. Do let
me speak to your mistresses?
No, not I.
What can they do for you?
You should not be roving about
now. It looks very ill.
But where shall I go if you
drive me away? What shall I do?
Oh, I'll
warrant you know where to go
and what to do. Mind you
don't do wrong. That's all.
Here is a penny. Now go.
A penny cannot feed me
and I have no strength to go farther.
Don't shut the door.
Oh, don't. For God's sake.
I must. The rain is
driving in. Tell the young
ladies. Let me see them.
Indeed, I will not.
You are not what you ought to be
or you wouldn't make such a
noise. Move off.
But I must die if I am turned away.
Not you,
I'm feared. You have some ill planes
agate that bring you about
folks' houses at this time of night.
If you've any followers,
housebreakers or such
like, anywhere near,
you may tell them we are not
by ourselves in the house.
We have a gentleman and dogs
and guns. Here the
honest but inflexible servant
clapped the door to and
bolted it within.
This was the climax, a pang
of exquisite suffering,
a throw of true despair.
Rent and heave my heart.
Worn out indeed
I was. Not another step
could I stir.
I sunk on the wet
doorstep. I groaned.
I wrung my hands. I wept
in utter anguish.
Oh, this spectre of death.
Oh, this last hour
approaching in such horror.
Alas, this isolation,
this vanishment from my
kind. Not only the anchor
of hope but the footing of
fortitude was gone.
At least for a moment
but the last I soon endeavoured
to regain.
I can't but die, I said,
and I believe in God.
Let me try to wait his will
in silence.
These words I not only thought
but uttered, and
thrusting back all my misery
into my heart, I made an effort
to compel it to remain there,
dumb and still.
All men must die,
said a voice quite close at
hand, but all are not
condemned to meet lingering
and premature doom.
Such as yours would be
if you perished here of want.
Who or what speaks?
I asked, terrified,
at the unexpected sound
and, incapable now
of deriving from any
occurrence, a hope evade.
A form was near.
What form?
The pitch-dark night and my
enfeebled vision prevented me
from distinguishing.
With a loud, long knock,
the newcomer appealed to the door.
Is it you, Mr St John?
cried Hannah.
Yes, yes,
open, quickly.
Well, how wet and cold
you must be. Such a wild night
as it is. Come in,
your sisters are quite uneasy about
you, and I believe there are
bad folks about. There has
been a beggar-woman, I declare
she has not gone yet.
Lay down there, get up, for shame,
move up, I say.
Hush, Hannah,
I have a word to say to the woman.
You have done your duty
in excluding. Now let me do
mine in admitting her.
I was near and listened to both
you and her. I think
this is a peculiar case.
I must at least examine
into it. Young woman,
rise and pass before me
into the house.
With difficulty I obeyed
him. Presently I stood
within that clean, bright
kitchen, on the very half,
trembling, sickening,
conscience of an aspect
in the last degree ghastly,
wild and weather-beaten.
The two ladies, their
brother, Mr St John,
the old servant, were all gazing
at me. St John,
who is it? I heard
someone ask. I cannot
tell. I found her at the door
was the reply.
She does look white, said Hannah.
As white as clay or death
was responded.
She will fall, let her sit.
And indeed my head swum.
I dropped, but a chair
received me. I still
possessed my senses, though
just now I could not speak.
Perhaps a little water
would restore her, Hannah,
fetch some, but she is worn
to nothing, how very thin
and how very bloodless.
A mere spectre.
Is she ill or only
famished? Famished,
I think. Hannah, is that
milk? Give it to me and
a piece of bread. Diana,
I knew her by the long
curls, which I saw dripping
between me and the fire as
she bent over me,
broke some bread, dipped it in
the milk and put it to my lips.
Her face was near
mine. I saw there was pity
in it, and I felt sympathy
in her hurried breathing.
In her simple words, too,
the same balm like emotion
spoke. Try to eat?
Yes, try,
repeated Mary gently.
And Mary's hand removed
my sodden bonnet and lifted
my head. I tasted
what they offered me, feebly
at first, eagerly soon.
Not too much at
first. Restrain her, said the
brother. She has had enough
and he withdrew the cup of
milk and the plate of bread.
A little more, St. John.
Look at the avidity in
her eyes. No more
at present, sister. Try if
she can speak now. Ask her
her name. I felt
I could speak and I answered.
My name
is Joan Elliott.
Anxious as ever to avoid
discovery, I had before
resolved to assume an alias.
And where do you live?
Where are your friends?
I was silent.
Can we sing for anyone you know?
I shook my head.
What account can you give
of yourself?
Somehow, now that I had
once crossed the threshold of this
house, and once was brought
face to face with its owners,
I felt no longer outcast,
vagrant, and
disowned by the wide world.
I dared to put off the
mendicant, to resume
my natural manner and character.
I began once more
to know myself, and
when Mr. St. John demanded
an account, which at
present I was far too weak to
render, I said after
a brief pause,
Sir, I can give you
no details tonight.
But what then, said
he, do you expect me
to do for you?
Nothing, I replied. My
strength suffice for but short
answers. Diana took the
word. Do you mean,
she asked, that we have
now given you what age you
require, and that we may
dismiss you to the moor
and the rainy night?
I looked at her. She had,
I thought, a remarkable
countenance, instinct
both with power and goodness.
I took sudden
courage. Answering
her compassionate gaze with a
smile, I said,
I will trust you,
if I were a masterless and
stray dog. I know
that you would not turn me from
your hearth tonight,
as it is I really have no
fear. Do with me
and for me as you like,
but excuse me from much
discourse. My breath
is short. I feel a spasm
when I speak. All three
surveyed me, and all three
were silent.
Hannah, said Mr. St. John
at last, let her sit
there at present and ask her
no questions. In ten minutes
more, give her the remainder of
that milk and bread.
Mary and Diana let us
go into the parlour and talk
the matter over.
They withdrew. Very soon
one of the ladies returned.
I could not tell which.
A kind of pleasant stupor was
stealing over me as I sat
by the denial fire.
In an undertone
she gave some directions to
Hannah. Erlong,
with the servant's aid,
I contrived to mount a staircase,
my dripping clothes were removed.
Soon a warm,
dry bed received me.
I, thank God,
experienced amidst unutterable
exhaustion
a glow of grateful joy
and slept.
End of chapter